Sentence Database A01-000
A MOVE to stop Mr. Gaitskell from nominating any more Labour life Peers is to be made at a meeting of Labour M Ps tomorrow. Mr. Michael Foot has put down a resolution on the subject and he is to be backed by Mr. Will Griffiths, M P for Manchester Exchange.
Sentence Database A01-003
Though they may gather some Left-wing support, a large majority of Labour M Ps are likely to turn down the Foot-Griffiths resolution. Mr. Foot's line will be that as Labour M Ps opposed the Government Bill which brought life Peers into existence, they should not now put forward nominees. He believes that the House of Lords should be abolished and that Labour should not take any steps which would appear to "prop up" an outdated institution.
Sentence Database A01-007
Since 1958, 13 Labour life Peers and Peeresses have been created. Most Labour sentiment would still favour the abolition of the House of Lords, but while it remains Labour has to have an adequate number of members. THE two rival African Nationalist Parties of Northern Rhodesia have agreed to get together to face the challenge from Sir Roy Welensky, the Federal Premier.
Sentence Database A01-011
Delegates from Mr. Kenneth Kaunda's United National Independence Party (280,000 members) and Mr. Harry Nkumbula's African National Congress (400,000) will meet in London today to discuss a common course of action. Sir Roy is violently opposed to Africans getting an elected majority in Northern Rhodesia, but the Colonial Secretary, Mr. Iain Macleod, is insisting on a policy of change
Sentence Database A01-014
Sir Roy's United Federal Party is boycotting the London talks on the Protectorate's future, said Mr. Nkumbula last night: "We want to discuss what to do if the British Government gives in to Sir Roy and the talks fall through. There are bound to be demonstrations." Yesterday Sir Roy's chief aide, Mr. Julius Greenfield, telephoned his chief a report on his talk with Mr. Macmillan at Chequers.
Sentence Database A01-020
Mr. Macleod went on with the conference at Lancaster House despite the crisis which had blown up. He has now revealed his full plans to the Africans and liberals attending. These plans do not give the Africans the overall majority they are seeking. African delegates are studying them today. The conference will meet to discuss the function of a proposed House of Chiefs.

Sentence Database A01-026
MR. IAIN MACLEOD, the Colonial Secretary, denied in the Commons last night that there have been secret negotiations on Northern Rhodesia's future. The Northern Rhodesia conference in London has been boycotted by the two main settlers' parties - the United Federal Party and the Dominion Party. But representatives of Sir Roy Welensky, Prime Minister of the Central African Federation, went to Chequers at the weekend for talks with Mr. Macmillan.


Sentence Database A01-030
Northern Rhodesia is a member of the Federation. Mr. Macleod was not at the weekend meeting. But he told M Ps yesterday: "I have no knowledge of secret negotiations." He said Britain had an obligation to consult the Federal Government. But the final decision remained with the British Government. Mr. James Callaghan, Labour's Colonial spokesman, said Sir Roy had no right to delay progress in the talks by refusing to sit round the conference table.
Sentence Database A01-043
Informal talks at Lancaster House will resume today. PRESIDENT KENNEDY today defended the appointment of a Negro as his Housing Minister. It has aroused strong opposition from the anti-Negro senators of the Deep South. The negro is Mr. Robert Weaver of New York. One of his tasks will be to see there is no racial discrimination in Government and State housing projects.

Sentence Database A01-049
Senator Allen Ellender, of Louisiana, sparked off the opposition by telling a television audience it was "current Washington gossip" that Weaver once had Communist affiliations. The Senate Banking Committee, which is headed by another Southern Senator - Willis Robertson, of Virginia - met today in closed session to discuss Weaver's appointment. Senator Robertson later disclosed he had sent a letter to Mr. Kennedy saying he had received several complaints about Weaver's loyalty.
Sentence Database A01-049(A01-049x)
Senator Allen Ellender, of Louisiana, sparked off the opposition by telling a television audience it was "current Washington gossip" that Weaver once had Communist affiliations. The Senate Banking Committee, which is headed by another Southern Senator - Willis Robertson, of Virginia - met today in closed session to discuss Weaver's appointment. Senator Robertson later disclosed he had sent a letter to Mr. Kennedy saying he had received several complaints about Weaver's loyalty.
Sentence Database A01-053
He said those concerned Mr. Weaver's alleged association with organisations black-listed by the Government. Immediately Mr. Kennedy rushed a letter to Senator Robertson saying the Federal Bureau of Investigation had reported on Mr. Weaver. He believed he would perform "outstanding service" in his post. Senator Robertson's committee has to pass Mr. Weaver's nomination before it can be considered by the full Senate.
Sentence Database A01-058
PRESIDENT KENNEDY is ready to get tough over West Germany's cash offer to help America's balance of payments position. He said bluntly in Washington yesterday that the offer - $357million - was not good enough. And he indicated that his Government would try to get Germany to pay more. He did not mention personal talks with Dr. Adenauer, the West German Chancellor.




Sentence Database A01-063
But he said discussions "on a higher level than in the past" might be useful. The President will probably discuss the problem with Dr. Brentano, the West German Foreign Minister, who is due in Washington next week. A big slice of Germany's "aid" is the early payment of a $210million debt to America. United States officials quickly point out that this is money due to America anyway.
Sentence Database A01-068
And they are unimpressed by the Germans' claim that they cannot pay more than $357million without upsetting their own economy. The Americans say Germany is having it too good and is not paying for the past or for the present. The Adenauer Government flatly rejected attempts by the Eisenhower Government to get them to pay a regular sum towards the cost of keeping American troops in Germany.
Sentence Database A01-072
These support costs are a big drain on America's dollar reserves. Dr. Adenauer's answer is the one-and-for-all cash offer of $357million. President Kennedy's rejection of it is a painful blow to the West German Government. It will now have to pay more - and increase taxation to do so - or run the obvious risks in upsetting the new American administration.
Sentence Database A01-077
And, since this is election year in West Germany, Dr. Adenauer is in a tough spot. Joyce Egginton cables: President Kennedy at his Washington Press conference admitted he did not know whether America was lagging behind Russia in missile power. He said he was waiting for his senior military aides to come up with the answer on February 20.

Sentence Database A01-082
This surprising statement was a sharp about-face from his warnings during the Presidential election campaign. He claimed "slackness in the Eisenhower Administration had caused America to lag behind Russia in nuclear development. President Kennedy did his best to avoid giving Pressmen a direct answer. George Brown, CHILDREN TWO men who are poles apart in personality last night dominated Parliament's fiercest battle since the 1959 election: Mr. George Brown and Mr. Enoch Powell, the Health Minister.
Sentence Database A01-087
Mr. Brown, passionate and warm-hearted, led Labour's attack on the higher health charges. Mr. Powell, white-faced and outwardly unemotional, replied with a statistical statement - and ended by inciting Labour M Ps to angry uproar. One dealt with the human issue behind the Health Service; the other tried to show that the balance-sheet must always come first.
Sentence Database A01-091
The result of the vote was not in doubt. For the Tories were massed in answer to their whip to defeat a censure motion on the Government for "undermining the Health Service" and placing heavy burdens on those least able to bear them. Mr. Brown declared that the policy under censure was monstrous. It had offended many people far beyond the ranks of Labour supporters.
Sentence Database A01-096
The Press, many doctors and public were denouncing the proposals. He quoted from this letter which Mr. Gaitskell had received: "My background is a doctor of 68, who has practised medicine for 43 years, chiefly as a panel doctor. 'I am a lifelong Conservative. I am horrified and amazed by my party's proposal to prostitute the whole principle of the State service and to render that service a hardship to poor people."

Sentence DatabaseA01-102
"After a lifetime of helping others and healing the sick, my considered opinion is that anybody supporting the increased charges is a wicked, old - ". Mr. Brown went on: "We are dealing with a noble edifice which needs an imaginative architect to improve it, but it has got a quantity surveyor. We have descended from the real problems to fiddling about with bills of cost."
Sentence Database A01-107
"We believe that a comprehensive medical service, free to the patient at the point of need and with one standard for all sick people, is good and attainable. "We remain for it. But the Tories never were." Interrupted by angry Tories, Mr. Brown retorted: "The jackals bay when there is nothing better they can do."
Sentence Database A01-113
He told them that their conception of social services was wholly different - fundamentally different from that of Labour. They would provide an ambulance service for the absolutely wretched - but it would not be too comfortable nor too easy to get. Answering jeers that it was Labour which first put a ceiling on health spending and started charges, Mr. Brown reminded the hostile Government benches that was done in 1950 because of the financial strain of the Korean war.
Sentence Database A01-117
In fact, the Tories made it worse now for the sick and needy than Labour had to make it in 1950. And as a percentage of social service expenditure, health had fallen from 28.5 to 23.1 per cent. Then Mr. Brown swung his attack directly to the unsmiling Mr. Powell. He demanded that instead of taking it out of the patients Mr. Powell should take ruthless action against the drug making industry, whose profits had risen by up to 400 per cent. in the last eight years.
Sentence Database A01-122
"Mr. Powell finds it easier to take it out of mothers, children and sick people than to take on this vast industry," Mr. Brown commented icily. "Let us have a full inquiry into the cost of drugs and the pharmaceutical industry." The health of children today owed much to the welfare food scheme. It was maintained during the war. Now in conditions of Tory affluence it seemed it could not be carried on.




Sentence Database A01-128
When Mr. Brown sat down Labour M Ps cheered for a full minute - and even his bitterest opponents on defence joined in. Mr. Powell devoted half his speech to giving details of plans for improving the hospital service, on which indeed the Government is making progress. His basic defence of the Health Service cuts was that "even after the proposed changes the net cost of the service to the Exchequer will have increased over three years by 20 per cent."
Sentence Database A01-132
"That cannot continue without either development being limited or an adjustment being made in financing." The Government decided to adjust the financing - which Mr. Powell claimed was underpinning - not undermining - the service. Answering the attack on "economic charges" for welfare foods, Mr. Powell said that all these foods would still be free in families receiving regular National Assistance grants.

Sentence Database A01-132(A01-132x (Same content as A01-132))
"That cannot continue without either development being limited or an adjustment being made in financing." The Government decided to adjust the financing - which Mr. Powell claimed was underpinning - not undermining - the service. Answering the attack on "economic charges" for welfare foods, Mr. Powell said that all these foods would still be free in families receiving regular National Assistance grants.
Sentence Database A03-050
On the other hand, Mr. Pearson excels in meeting people informally, but many still regard him "as some sort of cross between an egghead and a missionary". His party advisers are now trying to correct that image. The blow he has gone; he is having lessons on television techniques and is being coached by speech experts.
Sentence Database A03-071
But, at the same time, there is reason to believe that the Federal Government is not convinced, on the basis of the information it has so far, that such a project would be justified from a scientific point of view; and not merely constitute a "prestige" satellite, duplicating to some extent American efforts, as Die Welt suggests today in a highly critical editorial article.

Sentence Database A03-073
On the specific question of the use of Blue Streak, Mr. Thorneycroft's task will be easier. He can point out that this is the only rocket and launcher in Europe to have reached a sufficient stage of development for adaptation as the first stage in putting a heavy satellite into outer space. There has also been some talk of adopting another British rocket, Black Knight, for the second stage, but the French have one of their own called Veronique which they would like to see used.



Sentence Database A03-080
The Foreign Ministry spokesman added today, however, that the Brussels Treaty was irrelevant, because research on the various rocket stages had already been concluded, and only cooperation on the type of capsule was involved. A lesser obstacle to German participation is the absence of any Ministry or Minister directly responsible for it - and therefore of any budget under which funds could be appropriated.
Sentence Database A03-089
This is expected eventually to replace the Fiat G-91, and the F 104 Starfighter, the backbone of the German Air Force.
Sentence Database A05-000
Printed text:
The next White Paper on defence, to be published in March, is likely to contain a five-year plan for the three Services. Its aim will be to produce superbly equipped, all-Regular forces of about 400,000 men. The three Services would be “integrated” to a greater extent than ever before.
Sentence Database A05-013
Printed text:
The scheme will be subject to Cabinet approval. Mr. Watkinson remains convinced that the policy initiated in 1957, in Mr. Sandys’s time as Minister of Defence, is still correct. This was to return to the tradition of all-Regular voluntary forces, with the last National Serviceman out of uniform by the end of 1962.
Sentence Database A05-017
Printed text:
The Minister regards the recent trend of recruiting figures as encouraging. He is confident the aim can be achieved. While the possibility of an eventual return to National Service in some form cannot be entirely discounted, he does not agree that the point has been reached where this need even be considered. If National Service is ever resorted to, engagement would probably have to be for three years.
A05-022.jpg
It is thought this would be the minimum necessary for the extended training modern arms require and to enable each man to serve at least a year overseas. There is no truth in suggestions that Mr. Watkinson is at odds with the Service chiefs over the decision to dispense with National Service, or over any other aspect of defence policy.
A05-025.jpg
Criticisms about Army manpower appear to have come mainly from retired officers who have held high positions but are out of touch with the existing situation. Mr. Watkinson has had the utmost support from the C.I.G.S., Field-Marshal Sir Francis Festing, who believes completely in the principle of an all-Regular army. Gen. Sir Richard Hull, who is to succeed Sir Francis, is equally convinced Mr. Watkinson is right.
A05-029.jpg
Sir Francis is to hand over to Sir Richard as from Nov. 1. The hand-over, due in September, was delayed because of the Berlin crisis. Mr. Watkinson and his advisers felt the change would be unwise at a moment when attention had to be concentrated on possible need for important military operations. For this reason Sir Francis stayed on, and sacrificed his leave.
A05-039.jpg
There was a computed 8.4 per cent. swing towards the Nationalist party of Dr. Verwoerd, the Prime Minister. This implies the disappearance of the Progressive party from the House. Early results in yesterday's general election showed Nationalists being returned in their strongholds, like Bloemfontein and the Transvaal, with slightly increased majorities. In the Cape, the veteran United Party politician, Mr. Harry Lawrence, standing as a Progressive, was defeated in his constituency, Salt River, by the United party candidate, Mr. H. M. Timooey.
A05-044.jpg
The defeat of the leader of the Progressive party, Dr. Steytler, in Port Elizabeth South, announced immediately afterwards by the United party candidate, Mr. Plewman, left the Progressives deprived of both their chief figures. Dr. Verwoerd and the Leader of the Opposition, Sir de Villiers Graaff, have been returned unopposed. The contests were for 86 seats as 70 Nationalists and 20 United party candidates are unopposed.
A05-048.jpg
Long before polling closed at 8 p.m. it was evident that voters were bored by the Government's frequent appeals to the electorate. The election was the fourth in four years. In most constituencies it may go down as the most apathetic in the country's history. THE Prime Minister disclosed in the Commons last night that he had considered early in the Parliamentary recess whether to mobilise reserves necessary to bring the British Army of the Rhine on to a war footing.
A05-053.jpg
He decided that it would be a great error to do so and to recall Parliament. But there would be no hesitation in mobilising if a further deterioration in the situation warranted such a step. It would have to be accompanied by other measures of a military, economic and political kind. Mr. Macmillan, who was winding up the foreign affairs debate, said the Government could not be party to accepting as a matter of principle the imposed division of Germany.
A05-058.jpg
"We must not be rattled into surrender, but we must not - and I am not - be afraid of negotiation." Mr. Godber, Minister of State, Foreign Office, said earlier that the Government had asked the Medical Research Council to reassess the fallout position in view of the Russian tests. The Council's findings would be made public.
A05-062.jpg
With a vigour and authority which delighted old Parliamentary friends and foes alike, the East of Avon, the former Sir Anthony Eden, in his maiden speech in the House of Lords last night, gave a warning that appeasement over Berlin could only lead to war. To stand firm, he declared, was not to invite war, but the surest way to avert it.
A05-069.jpg
It was the end of a rather curious speech in which Mr. Macmillan wound up the two-day debate on foreign affairs. He began in a low, almost chatty monotone, and his voice never rose to any accent of urgency. He passed in rapid review the United Nations Secretariat; nuclear tests; the canard about British interference with the United Nations in the Congo; Kuwait; and South-East Asia.
A05-073.jpg
He spent most of his short half-hour on Berlin. He deplored the possibility of some "new myth" about betrayal of Germany by the Allies. "We do not," he said, "really know what the Russians want." But he was certain that they want to establish a final and irrevocable division of Germany. Britain could not be party to an imposed division. But negotiation, as the debate had shown, could be undertaken on a variety of bases.
A05-080.jpg
Mr. Macmillan explained that he had deliberately refrained during the summer from recalling Parliament or ordering mobilisation by proclamation, such as would be necessary to bring the British Army of the Rhine on to a fully active footing. That would have created a thoroughly undesirable atmosphere of panic. He thought that the situation was rather more hopeful.
A05-084.jpg
The Russians now realised its seriousness. The French doubts were more about procedure than about substance. The Prime Minister's attitude of studied calm brought down the temperature of the debate, which never at any time rose to fever pitch, to a remarkable degree of sub-normality. Throughout Mr. Macmillan's speech the Earl of Home, Foreign Secretary, was listening in the Peers' Gallery.
A05-089.jpg
The early speakers in the debate each severely rated the speech of his predecessor. These strictures were all too well justified. He started with the plaintive wailings of Mr. Healey, "Shadow" Foreign Secretary, described by Mr. Godber, Minister of State, Foreign Office, as "pedantic and obscure on Berlin, damaging and obscure on the Congo." In turn, Mr. Godber was censured by Mr. Shinwell, former Labour Defence Minister, for having read the House an ill-prepared essay.
A05-094.jpg
The trouble about such debates is that they range too widely. They remind one of the Rugby match in "Tom Brown's Schooldays," in which all the boys were welcome to take part, and only those who "really meant business" removed their jackets. Not many metaphorical braces were visible in the early stages of to-night's debate. Mr. Healey had another tilt at the Prime Minister's golf-course Press conference, which he described as "a display of flabby and fatuous complacency which takes us straight back to Neville Chamberlain."
A05-099.jpg
A reference to the reunification of Germany brought a bark of "Start another war!" from Mr. Ellis Smith (Lab., Stoke on Trent S.). Then Mr. Healey launched out on his pet theme of limitation of armaments in Europe. This could be suggested, be linked with prohibition of the production of atomic weapons in any part of Europe. Inspection and control would be much easier to establish in these territories.
A05-104.jpg
Mr. Healey denounced the Government for using double standards. Ministers had rebuked the unaligned nations for not condemning the new Russian tests, but they themselves had no condemnation for events in Angola or Algeria. It was not for the Government, said Mr. Healey, to take up moral attitudes, "especially when the temple of their religion is the bingo-parlour."
A05-108.jpg
This puzzled such students of comparative religion as had failed to detect this cult. But Mr. Healey had a partial and limited success. He rallied behind him the Left-wing opinion so coolly snubbed last night by his leader, Mr. Gaitskell. Mr. Godber's performance merited all the mild scorn heaped on it by Mr. Shinwell.
A05-113.jpg
True, he did tell the House that the Government had asked the Medical Research Council to reassess the fall-out position in view of the Russian tests, and said that the council's findings would be published. He was not so happy in his defence of the Government's failure to condemn France for her nuclear tests in the Sahara on the grounds that they were only little ones.
A05-116.jpg
This was too reminiscent of the nursemaid and her illegitimate baby. For the most part Mr. Godber muttered his way through a cliché-ridden Foreign Office brief. He resembles the elephant seal, an otherwise endearing creature whose articulation is limited, we are told, to a series of heavy sighs. Sir Lynn Ungoed-Thomas, M.P. for Leicester N.E., a former Labour Solicitor-General, and Mrs. Barbara Castle, M.P. for Blackburn, a member of the Labour party National Executive, delivered a letter to Mr. Soldatov, the Russian Ambassador, last night protesting against the Russian nuclear tests.
A05-121.jpg
It was signed by 60 Labour M.P.s, many of them Left-wing sympathisers. It condemned "the pollution of the world's atmosphere as a crime against humanity." A personal letter of protest against the tests from Canon Collins, chairman of the Campaign for Nuclear Disarmament, addressed to Mr. Khrushchev, was also taken to the Russian Embassy.
A05-125.jpg
A POLITICAL CORRESPONDENT writes: Ban-the-bomb demonstrators thronged the Central Lobby of the House of Commons last night and formed a queue stretching for more than 200 yards outside in Old Palace Yard. About 2,000 lobbied M.P.s and harangued them on disarmament.


